---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.9.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Homework 1

In this assignment, we will practice using python to perform basic set operations. Problem 1 asks you to use python's set objects (covered in Section 2.1 of the workbook); problems 2, 3 and 4 ask you to use inner and outer join operations on a dataframe (covered in Section 2.2 of the workbook). We will use sets we construct as well as the ```students``` dataframe introduced in Section 2.2.

## Problem 1: Sets and Set Algebra in Python

### Part A
Create the following 4 sets.

* Set $A$ contains all even natural numbers (without zero) that are smaller or equal to 200.
* Set $B$ contains all odd natural numbers (without zero) that are smaller or equal to 200.
* Set $C := \{5n | n \in \mathbb{N}^*, n\le 200\}$.
* Set $D$ contains all natural numbers (without zero) that are smaller or equal to 200.

Note: Printing all even or odd numbers in a given range are typically coding questions during a job interview.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part B

* i) What is the cardinality of the set $A\cup B \cup C$
* ii) What is the cardinality of the set $A\cap B$
* iii) What is the cardinality of the set $A\cap D$
* iv)  What is the cardinality of the relative complement $A\backslash D$ 
* v)  What is the cardinality of the relative complement $D\backslash B$

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part C
Varify that De Morgan's law of intersection $(A\cap B)^c = A^c \cup B^c$ holds for this example.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
import pandas as pd
from datasets import students
students
```

## Problem 2: Distributive laws
In this problem, we will use data frame operations to verify that unions are distributive over intersections; namely, that $A\cup(B\cap C) = (A\cup B)\cap(A\cup C)$.

### Part A

Using select (and possible outer join) operations, construct a table ```math_and_stat``` containing students who are either a mathematics or statistics major, a table```junior``` containing the students that are juniors, and a table ```stat102_103``` containing students that are enrolled in either stat102 or stat103 (or both).

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part B
Using inner and outer join opertations, verify that ```math_and_stat``` $\cup$ (```stat102_103``` $\cap$ ```junior```) $=$ (```math_and_stat```$\cup$ ```stat102_103```) $\cap$ (```math_and_stat```$\cup$ ```junior```).

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

## Problem 3: De Morgan's Laws using data frames

In this problem we will verify De Morgan's Laws using data frame operations. 
De Morgan's Laws state that for any two sets $A, B$, we have
$$
(i) \;\;\;(A\cup B)^c = A^c\cap B^c\\
(ii) \;\;\;(A\cap B)^c = A^c\cup B^c
$$

### Part A

Use select operations to define two tables ```soph``` and ```stat102```, which contain students who are sophomores and enrolled in stat102, respectively.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part B

For the rest of the problem, think of ```soph``` and ```stat102``` as sets indexed by the value of ```StudentID```. Verify that $(i)$ holds; namely, verify that $(\text{soph}\cup \text{stat102})^c = \text{soph}^c \cap \text{stat102}^c$.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part C
Verify that $(ii)$ holds; namely, verify that $(\text{soph}\cap \text{stat102})^c = \text{soph}^c \cup \text{stat102}^c$.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

## Problem 4: Idempotence of set operations

In this problem, we will investigate the idea of _idempotence_. Intuitively, an operation is idempotent if applying the operation multiple times yields the same result as applying it just once.

Let ```math_and_stat``` be the set of students that are either a mathematics or statistics major (defined in Problem 2), and for any set of students $A$, define the operation $G(A)= A\cap math\_and\_stat$. 

### Part A
Using select operations, define ```fresh```, ```soph```, ```junior```, and ```senior``` be the sets of students that are freshmen, sophomores, juniors, and seniors, respectively.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```

### Part B 
Using join operations, verify that $G$ is idempotent; namely verify that $G(G(fresh)) = G(fresh)$, $G(G(soph)) = G(soph)$, $G(G(junior)) = G(junior)$, and $G(G(senior)) = G(senior)$.

```{code-cell} ipython3
### Your Code Goes Below ###
```
